.TH NETKIT.CONF 5 "July 2010" "" Netkit
.SH NAME
netkit.conf \- Netkit configuration file


\" ########################################

.SH DESCRIPTION

This file contains information about the Netkit configuration. It also stores
the default settings to be used when starting new virtual machines. A copy of
this file can be placed into the standard directories listed in the \fBFILES\fR
section. Thus, \fInetkit.conf\fR can be used to define both system wide and
user specific settings.

The file format is very simple. \fInetkit.conf\fR is nothing but a special shell
script which contains definitions of environment variables. Hence, it is a list of
\fIPARAMETER\fR=\fIVALUE\fR assignments.

No check is performed on the correctness of the configuration, so \fIVALUE\fR
must always be a valid setting (allowed range of values depends on the specific
\fIPARAMETER\fR being considered). Failure to comply to this constraint may
result in unpredictable behaviour. Moreover, it is very important that no
\fIVALUE\fR contains space characters.

\fIPARAMETER\fR can be one of the following.


.SS
Generic Netkit configuration parameters

.TP
.B
LOGFILENAME
Name of the file that stores a log of the issued Netkit commands. Every time a
Netkit command is executed (e.g., \fIvstart\fR, \fIvhalt\fR, etc.), an entry
containing the name of the command, the user who started it and a timestamp is
added to this file. Different users can share the same file. Setting this
parameter to an empty string disables command logging.

\fISuggested value\fR: $NETKIT_HOME/netkit_commands.log
.br
\fIDefault if no setting\fR: "" (logging disabled)

.TP
.B
MCONSOLE_DIR
This is the name of a directory that stores temporary socket files used to send
directives to running virtual machines. Each user should set this value to a different
directory (otherwise, conflicts may occur when different users run virtual
machines having the same name).

\fISuggested value\fR: $HOME/.netkit/mconsole
.br
\fIDefault if no setting\fR: $HOME/.netkit/mconsole

.TP
.B
HUB_SOCKET_DIR
This is the directory in which temporary socket files used by the virtual hubs are placed.
Different users can share the same directory. Thus, setting this parameter to
a standard temporary directory like ``/tmp/uml'' is allowed.

\fISuggested value\fR: $HOME/.netkit/hubs
.br
\fIDefault if no setting\fR: $HOME/.netkit/hubs

.TP
.B
HUB_SOCKET_PREFIX
Temporary socket files used by the virtual hubs are named according to a standard
pattern. This parameter allows to configure the prefix that should be used in
the name of every socket file. This is useful, for example, in order to ease
recognizing these special files.
.br
This parameter must not contain underscores (`\fB_\fR') or commas (`\fB,\fR').

\fISuggested value\fR: vhub
.br
\fIDefault if no setting\fR: vhub

.TP
.B
HUB_SOCKET_EXTENSION
Similarly to \fBHUB_SOCKET_PREFIX\fR, it is also possible to configure the standard
extension to be used for socket file names.
.br
This parameter must not contain underscores (`\fB_\fR') or commas (`\fB,\fR'),
and must always start with a dot (`\fB.\fR').

\fISuggested value\fR: .cnct
.br
\fIDefault if no setting\fR: .cnct

.TP
.B
HUB_LOG
Each virtual hub may produce messages reporting error conditions or information
about its status. All these messages are stored inside a log file whose name
is the one configured in \fBHUB_LOG\fR. This logging service cannot be disabled;
hence, empty names are not allowed for this parameter. Different users can
share the same file.

\fISuggested value\fR: $HUB_SOCKET_DIR/vhubs.log
.br
\fIDefault if no setting\fR: $HUB_SOCKET_DIR/vhubs.log


.TP
.B
USE_SUDO
This parameter determines how root privileges will be acquired when system-wide
configurations need to be applied (e.g., a tap interface needs to be set up).
If set to \fByes\fR, then Netkit will use the \fBsudo\fR(8) command for the
purpose. By suitably setting up the \fBsudoers\fR(5) file, this can prevent the
user from having to type the root password every time.
.br
If set to \fBno\fR, then Netkit will use the \fIsu\fR command instead, which
requires inserting the root password for each privileged operation that needs to
be carried out.
.br
For more information about how to set up the \fBsudoers\fR(5) file, see the
section \fBSETTING UP NETKIT FOR USE WITH SUDO\fR below.

\fISuggested value\fR: yes
.br
\fIDefault if no setting\fR: yes





.SS
Default settings for newly started virtual machines

.TP
.B
VM_MEMORY
This is the default amount of available memory inside the virtual machines, in
MB.

\fIvstart options\fR: \fB\-\-mem\fR, \fB\-M\fR
.br
\fISuggested value\fR: 16
.br
\fIDefault if no setting\fR: 16

.TP
.B
VM_MEMORY_SKEW
Starting a virtual machine requires allocating a certain amount of memory on the
host machine. This amount depends on the amount of available memory inside the
virtual machine (i.e., how much memory you decided to equip the machine with).
However, some extra memory is needed for kernel structures and other stuff.
Hence, the actual amount of consumed memory is slightly larger than that of
available memory inside the emulation. That is, there a skew between consumed
memory and emulated memory.
.br
This parameter allows adjusting the skew so that proper values are returned by
commands showing memory statistics (e.g., \fIvlist\fR on the host machine \(en
see \fBvlist\fR(1) \(en and `free -m' inside the virtual machine). The skew
is expressed in MB units.

\fISuggested value\fR: 4
.br
\fIDefault if no setting\fR: 4

.TP
.B
VM_MODEL_FS
This is the name of the default model filesystem. For more information about
\fImodel filesystem\fRs, see the README in the Netkit filesystem package and
the man page of \fBvstart\fR(1).
Remember that COW files must always be used in combination with the same
model filesystem (i.e., it is not possible to arbitrarily mix COW files and
model files).

\fIvstart options\fR: \fB\-\-model\-fs\fR, \fB\-m\fR
.br
\fISuggested value\fR: $NETKIT_HOME/fs/netkit-fs
.br
\fIDefault if no setting\fR: $NETKIT_HOME/fs/netkit-fs

.TP
.B
VM_KERNEL
This is the name of the UML kernel used by virtual machines. Even if there is no
particular restriction on the kernel to be used, the virtual machine filesystem
must store system tools which are compatible with the kernel being used. Moreover,
some filesystems support loading of kernel modules (the one shipped with Netkit
does). If this is the case, the kernel must have been compiled with support for
external modules, and modules must be available inside a special directory (see
the README in the Netkit kernel package for details on how to do this).

\fIvstart options\fR: \fB\-\-kernel\fR, \fB\-k\fR
.br
\fISuggested value\fR: $NETKIT_HOME/kernel/netkit-kernel
.br
\fIDefault if no setting\fR: $NETKIT_HOME/kernel/netkit-kernel

.TP
.B
VM_CON0
.PD 0
.TP
.B
VM_CON1
These parameters allow to configure the default device to which the primary
(\fBVM_CON0\fR) and secondary (\fBVM_CON1\fR) virtual machine consoles should be
attached. Allowed values for this setting are:

.RS
.TP
.B
none
Completely disable console (note that disabling both the primary and the
secondary console makes you unable to reach the virtual machine unless it runs
some remote shell service or other daemon).

.TP
.B
xterm
Attach console to a terminal emulator application.

.TP
.B
this
Attach console to the current terminal. At most one between the primary and
secondary console can be configured to use the current terminal.

.TP
.B
pty
Attach console to a pseudo terminal.

.TP
.B
port:\fIport\-number\fR
Attach console to TCP port \fIport\-number\fR. You can later reach it by telnetting
to this port. Consider that the virtual machine is not actually started until
you do so. Moreover, disconnecting while the machine is still running and later
reconnecting is not possible: only a single connection is supported. If you
happen to accidentally disconnect before halting the virtual machine, you can
still stop it by using either \fIvhalt\fR or \fIvcrash\fR (see \fBvhalt\fR,
\fBvcrash\fR).

.PP
\fIvstart options\fR: \fB\-\-con0\fR, \fB\-\-con1\fR
.br
\fISuggested value\fR: xterm (for \fBVM_CON0\fR), none (for \fBVM_CON1\fR)
.br
\fIDefault if no setting\fR: xterm (for \fBVM_CON0\fR), none (for \fBVM_CON1\fR)
.RE

.TP
.B
TERM_TYPE
This parameter determines the terminal emulator application to be used for
consoles attached to an \fBxterm\fR device. The application must be correctly
installed in the host system. The following values are allowed.

.RS
.TP
.B
xterm
Use the standard XTerm.

.TP
.B
konsole
Use the KDE Desktop Environment konsole.

.TP
.B
konsole-tabs
Same as \fBkonsole\fR, but different virtual machine consoles are opened inside
different tabs of the same konsole window.

.TP
.B
gnome
Use the Gnome Desktop gnome-terminal.

.PP
\fIvstart options\fR: \fB\-\-xterm\fR
.br
\fISuggested value\fR: xterm
.br
\fIDefault if no setting\fR: xterm
.RE

.TP
.B
CON0_PORTHELPER
This parameter should only be used in debugging issues in attaching the
primary console of virtual machines. When the primary console is attached to a
terminal emulator, Netkit can attempt to open the emulator in two different
ways:

.RS
.IP \(em 3
by directly starting the virtual machine kernel inside the terminal emulator, or
.IP \(em 3
by letting the virtual machine kernel open the terminal emulator on its own.
.PP
The second method is deemed as more standard when using User Mode Linux kernels
(like Netkit's), but is slightly less efficient and more prone to crashes, as
it relies on a separate software piece (the \fIport-helper\fR) for establishing
a communication between the kernel and the terminal emulator. The first method
is more efficient and robust and, for this reason, is currently adopted as
default choice.

No matter what the value of this parameter is, the secondary terminal will
always be opened using the second strategy.

\fISuggested value\fR: no
.br
\fIDefault if no setting\fR: no
.RE

.TP
.B
MAX_INTERFACES
This is the maximum number of network interfaces a virtual machine can be
equipped with. Valid interface numbers will range from 0 to \fBMAX_INTERFACES\fR\-1
(e.g., if \fBMAX_INTERFACES\fR is 2 only interfaces \fBeth0\fR and \fBeth1\fR can
be used).

\fISuggested value\fR: 40
.br
\fIDefault if no setting\fR: 40

.P
.B
MIN_MEM
.TP
.B
MAX_MEM
These parameters define the minimum and maximum tolerated amount of available
emulated memory inside virtual machines, in MB. These values can be set so that
users are prevented from consuming too many resources on the host machine.

\fISuggested value\fR: 8 (for \fBMIN_MEM\fR), 512 (for \fBMAX_MEM\fR)
.br
\fIDefault if no setting\fR: 8 (for \fBMIN_MEM\fR), 512 (for \fBMAX_MEM\fR)




.SS
Default settings for lab commands

.TP
.B
MAX_SIMULTANEOUS_VMS
This is the maximum number of virtual machines that can be simultaneously
started when using parallel startup. This value must be a positive integer. A
value of 0 corresponds to setting no limit. For more information about parallel
startup, see \fBlstart\fR(1).

\fIlstart options\fR: \fB\-p\fR
.br
\fISuggested value\fR: 5
.br
\fIDefault if no setting\fR: 5

.TP
.B
GRACE_TIME
This value represents the number of seconds to wait for before launching the
next virtual machine. This parameter is only useful when using \fBlstart\fR(1)
in fast mode or when using parallel startup. For more information, see
\fBlstart\fR(1).

\fIlstart options\fR: \fB\-\-wait\fR, \fB\-w\fR
.br
\fISuggested value\fR: 0 (for labs with less than 4 machines), more than 5 (for
labs with more than 4 machines).
.br
\fIDefault if no setting\fR: 0


\" ########################################

.SH "SETTING UP NETKIT FOR USE WITH SUDO"

From time to time, Netkit requires administrative privileges on the host machine
to set up particular configurations (e.g., ``\fBtap\fR'' interfaces). Netkit can
exploit either the \fBsu\fR(1) or the \fBsudo\fR(8) command in order to do this.
This behaviour can be configured by changing the value of the \fBUSE_SUDO\fR
parameter. Depending on this choice, Netkit will ask for a different password:
for the case of \fBsu\fR(1) it is the root password, while for the case of
\fBsudo\fR(8) it usually is the user's password. In most setups, \fBsudo\fR(8)
is able to keep user authentication information for a certain amount of time
during which the password is not requested any longer, even for administrative
operations. For this reason, by default Netkit uses \fBsudo\fR(8).

By changing the \fBsudoers\fR(5) file it is possible to completely disable the
password prompt, so that the password is never requested (not even the first
time) for any administrative operations.

.ce 3
.B ***************************************************************
.B ***\ WARNING\ ***\ ***\ WARNING\ ***\ ***\ WARNING\ ***\ ***\ WARNING\ ***
.B ***************************************************************
.IP "" 5
By applying the following configuration you enable the affected user to start a
shell (therefore any other command) on your host with root privileges, without
any passwords being asked for. Put in other words, by enabling the following
setting, a user of your choice is entitled to freely gain root privileges and
run whichever command she wants without anyone asking her for a password.

This may be an intentional setting on your machine if you frequently perform
administrative operations, but in the general case
.ul 2
please apply this change only if you are aware of the consequences.
.ft
.br
.RE

In order to allow user \fIUSERNAME\fR to gain root privileges without being
asked for a password, you need to edit the \fI/etc/sudoers\fR file. Since the
contents of this file are deemed critical for your system security, it is
recommended to edit the file using \fBvisudo\fR(8), which prevents multiple
simultaneous edits and applies other sanity checks before applying the changes.
Of course, other editors may be used as well.

Once you have opened the file, you need to append the following line at the end:

.nf
\fIUSERNAME\fR ALL = NOPASSWD: /bin/sh
.fi

where \fIUSERNAME\fR is the name of the affected Netkit user, ALL means that
this setting will work on all machines (read as: ``no matter what the name of
the machine you are setting this on is, the setting will work''), NOPASSWD means
that the following commands can be executed with an arbitrary user ID (including
root's), and /bin/sh is the name of the command.


\" ########################################

.SH "ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES"

Some configuration parameters can be overridden by simply defining an
environment variable. A list of supported variables follow.

.TP 20
.B
NETKIT_FILESYSTEM
Name of the default model filesystem.

\fICorresponding parameter\fR: \fBVM_MODEL_FS\fR

.TP
.B
NETKIT_MEMORY
Default amount of available memory inside virtual machines.

\fICorresponding parameter\fR: \fBVM_MEMORY\fR

.TP
.B
NETKIT_KERNEL
Name of the UML kernel used by virtual machines

\fICorresponding parameter\fR: \fBVM_KERNEL\fR

.TP
.B
NETKIT_CON0
.PD 0
.TP
.B
NETKIT_CON1
Device to which the primary and secondary consoles are attached.

\fICorresponding parameter\fR: \fBVM_CON0\fR, \fBVM_CON1\fR

.TP
.B
NETKIT_TERM
Terminal emulator application to be used for consoles in \fBxterm\fR mode.

\fICorresponding parameter\fR: \fBTERM_TYPE\fR


\" ########################################

.SH "SAMPLE netkit.conf FILE"

.nf
#!/bin/false
# The above line prevents execution of this file

LOGFILENAME="$NETKIT_HOME/netkit_commands.log"

MCONSOLE_DIR="$HOME/.netkit/mconsole"
HUB_SOCKET_DIR="$HOME/.netkit/hubs"

HUB_SOCKET_PREFIX="vhub"
HUB_SOCKET_EXTENSION=".cnct"
HUB_LOG="$HUB_SOCKET_DIR/vhubs.log"
USE_SUDO=yes

VM_MEMORY=32
VM_MEMORY_SKEW=4
VM_MODEL_FS="$NETKIT_HOME/fs/netkit-fs"
VM_KERNEL="$NETKIT_HOME/kernel/netkit-kernel"

VM_CON0=xterm
VM_CON1=none
CON0_PORTHELPER=no
TERM_TYPE=xterm

MAX_INTERFACES=40
MIN_MEM=8
MAX_MEM=512

MAX_SIMULTANEOUS_VMS=5
GRACE_TIME=0
.fi


\" ########################################

.SH FILES

\fInetkit.conf\fR can be placed in one of the following locations.
If multiple instances exist, they will be processed in the order in which they
are listed below (each processed file overrides settings configured by the previous
one).

.TP
.I
/etc/netkit.conf
This instance of the \fInetkit.conf\fR file can be used to configure system wide
settings.

.TP
.I
$NETKIT_HOME/netkit.conf
This file may contain settings that are specific for a certain Netkit distribution.

.TP
.I
~/.netkit/netkit.conf
This file contains user specific settings.


\" ########################################

.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fIlstart\fR(1),
\fInetkit\fR(7),
Netkit filesystem README,
Netkit kernel README,
\fIvstart\fR(1).


\" ########################################

.SH AUTHOR
This man page: Massimo Rimondini
