.TH NETKIT 7 "November 2009" "" Netkit
.SH NAME
Netkit \- The NETwork emulation toolKIT


\" ########################################

.SH DESCRIPTION

Netkit is a self-contained low cost solution for the emulation of computer
networks. Within the Netkit environment each network device is implemented
by a virtual machine, and interconnection links are emulated by using virtual
collision domains (which you can see as virtual hubs).

Each virtual machine can be configured to have an arbitrary number of (virtual)
network interfaces. Virtual machines can also be configured to have no interfaces
at all, in which case they can serve as standalone emulated hosts.
However, this is not the application Netkit has been thought for. Netkit is \fBnot\fR
a host emulator: it is a network emulator.

Virtual machines use a customized filesystem which contains a standard Linux
installation (at the time this man page
is being written, it is a Debian distribution), which includes network
oriented software such as routing daemons (RIP, OSPF, etc.), a bunch of servers
(FTP, HTTP, etc.), firewalling utilities (iptables), diagnostic tools (ping, traceroute,
tcpdump, etc.), and other applications. By configuring the appropriate software,
it is possible to make a virtual machine behave as a specific network device
(e.g., a router). See the README in the Netkit filesystem package or the online
FAQs for instructions about changing the contents of the virtual machine
filesystems.

Virtual machines make use of a variant of the standard Linux kernel which is
compiled to be run as a userspace process. This variant is known as \fIUser Mode
Linux\fR (\fIUML\fR) kernel. You can find more information about UML at the
\fIUser-mode Linux Kernel Page\fR (\fIhttp://user-mode-linux.sourceforge.net\fR).
See also the README in the Netkit kernel package for information about building
a customized kernel for the virtual machines.

Netkit provides you with two alternative interfaces to start and configure virtual
machines. A set of `v'\-prefixed commands (\fIvclean\fR, \fIvconf\fR,
\fIvcrash\fR, \fIvhalt\fR, \fIvlist\fR, \fIvstart\fR), which allow to start and
manage single virtual machines while providing finegrained control on their
configuration, and a set of `l'\-prefixed commands (\fIlclean\fR, \fIlcrash\fR,
\fIlhalt\fR, \fIlinfo\fR, \fIlrestart\fR, \fIlstart\fR, \fIltest\fR), which ease setting up
preconfigured network laboratories consisting of several virtual machines.


\" ########################################

.SH "ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES"

In order for Netkit to work properly, the environment variable \fBNETKIT_HOME\fR
must be set to the name of the directory Netkit has been installed into.
.br
The \fBVLAB_HOME\fR variable is recognized as well, but this only happens for
backward compatibility. New Netkit installations and upgrades should use
\fBNETKIT_HOME\fR instead.


\" ########################################

.SH FILES

Netkit stores its default configuration settings inside a file named
`netkit.conf'. The existence of this file is required in order to make
Netkit work. See \fBnetkit.conf\fR(5) for information about the location of this
file and a description of its format.


\" ########################################

.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fIlclean\fR(1),
\fIlcrash\fR(1),
\fIlhalt\fR(1),
\fIlinfo\fR(1),
\fIlrestart\fR(1),
\fIlstart\fR(1),
\fIltest\fR(1),
\fIvclean\fR(1),
\fIvconf\fR(1),
\fIvcrash\fR(1),
\fIvhalt\fR(1),
\fIvlist\fR(1),
\fIvstart\fR(1),
\fIlab.conf\fR(5),
\fIlab.dep\fR(5),
\fInetkit.conf\fR(5),
Netkit filesystem README,
Netkit kernel README,
\fINetkit Home Page\fR
.nh
(\fIhttp://www.netkit.org\fR),
.hy
\fIThe Linux Kernel Archives\fR
.nh
(\fIhttp://www.kernel.org\fR),
.hy
\fIThe User-mode Linux Kernel Home Page\fR
.nh
(\fIhttp://user-mode-linux.sourceforge.net\fR).
.hy


\" ########################################

.SH AUTHOR
This man page: Massimo Rimondini

\fINetkit\fR is the result of the joint work of several people. The
project is carried on by the Department of Computer Science and Automation of the
University of Roma 3
.nh
(\fIhttp://www.dia.uniroma3.it\fR).
.hy
More precisely, people at the LUG (Linux User Group) Roma 3
.nh
(\fIhttp://www.lugroma3.org/\fR)
.hy
gave the initial startup and brought significant contributions that made
Netkit become a progressively more powerful environment. People within the
Computer Networks Research Group
.nh
(\fIhttp://www.dia.uniroma3.it/~compunet\fR)
.hy
actively supported the LUG team by providing new ideas and implementing new
features, and authored the most recent releases.

At the time this man page is being written, the project is entirely carried on
by the Computer Networks Research Group.

The Netkit team currently consists of:
.br
Giuseppe Di Battista
.br
Maurizio Patrignani
.br
Maurizio Pizzonia
.br
Massimo Rimondini

People involved across time also include:
.br
Andrea Cecchetti
.br
Lorenzo Colitti
.br
Matteo Corea
.br
Federico Mariani
.br
Stefano Pettini
.br
Flavia Picard
.br
Fabio Ricci

The Netkit team can be reached at the following address: <contact@netkit.org>.
You can also use this address to submit bug reports. Alternatively, you can contact
us via the mailing list <netkit.users@dia.uniroma3.it>.


\" ########################################

.so include/bugreport.man
