.TH LCLEAN 1 "July 2010" "" Netkit
.SH NAME
lclean \- clean temporary files created after launching netkit lab
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBlclean\fR [options] [\fIMACHINE-NAME\fR...]


\" ########################################

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fIlclean\fR can be used to delete temporary files that have been created while
running a Netkit lab. Some of the them are specific for
each virtual machine, while others are unique for the whole lab. Some are
written inside the directory from which \fIlstart\fR has been invoked, while
others are placed inside the lab directory.
.br
Assuming that \fIlab\-path\fR is the directory where the lab is located,
\fIlclean\fR deletes the following files, if found to exist:

.RS
 ./\fImachine\-name\fR.ready
.br
 ./\fImachine\-name\fR.disk
.br
 ./\fImachine\-name\fR.log (no longer produced by latest releases, but still
 removed for backwards compatibility)
.br
\fIlab\-path\fR/readyfor.test
.br
.RE

If invoked with no arguments, \fIlclean\fR removes temporary files for all the
virtual machines that make up the lab (i.e., \fImachine\-name\fR is replaced
by the name of each virtual machine). It is also possible to provide a list
of \fIMACHINE\-NAME\fRs, in which case \fIlclean\fR just removes temporary
files for those virtual machines (as well as the `readyfor.test' file).

Removing virtual machines COW filesystems (.disk files) implies that virtual
machines contents are reverted to their original state when the lab is restarted.
Of course, any persistent part of the lab is preserved, including those files
that are automatically copied inside virtual machines during the boot phase.

See the README file in the Netkit filesystem package for more information about
COW filesystems.

The following options are supported by \fIlclean\fR:

.TP
.B
\-d \fIDIRECTORY\fR
Assume the Netkit lab that is located inside \fIDIRECTORY\fR. If no \fB\-d\fR
option is provided, \fIlclean\fR assumes that the lab is located in the
current directory. The path to the lab directory (being that the current
directory or one provided by \fB\-d\fR) must never contain spaces.

This piece of information is necessary in order to remove some of the temporary
files and to retrieve the list of the virtual machines that make up the lab.

.PP
The following standard options are also supported.

.TP
.B
\-h
.PD 0
.TP
.B
\-\-help
Show usage information.

.TP
.B
\-v
.PD 0
.TP
.B
\-\-verbose
Show which files are being deleted.

.TP
.B
\-\-version
Print information about the installed Netkit release and the host kernel version
and exit. If ``\fI<unavailable>\fR'' is printed instead of a version number,
then the corresponding information could not be retrieved (for example because
a non-standard Netkit kernel or filesystem is being used).




\" ########################################

.SH "ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES"

All Netkit commands require that the \fBNETKIT_HOME\fR variable contains the
name of the directory Netkit is installed in.

Apart from this, \fIlclean\fR supports no other environment variables.

\" ########################################

.SH NOTES

Despite the fact that the two command names sound similar, \fIlclean\fR has
nothing to do with \fBvclean\fR(1). While \fIlclean\fR is a tool to get rid of
temporary files inside a Netkit lab directory (i.e., it works on the host
filesystem), \fBvclean\fR(1) is the Netkit ``panic button'', which allows to
kill hanging processes and to restore settings that may have been altered by
Netkit during past executions (firewall settings, configurations set up for tap
interfaces, etc.).

\" ########################################

.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fIlstart\fR(1),
\fIlcrash\fR(1),
\fIlhalt\fR(1),
\fIlrestart\fR(1),
\fIlinfo\fR(1),
\fIltest\fR(1),
\fIvclean\fR(1),
Netkit filesystem README.
    

\" ########################################

.SH AUTHOR

\fIlclean\fR script: Stefano Pettini, Fabio Ricci, Massimo Rimondini
.br
This man page: Fabio Ricci, Massimo Rimondini


\" ########################################

.so include/bugreport.man
