.TH LCRASH 1 "November 2009" "" Netkit
.SH NAME
lcrash \- crash machines of a netkit lab
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBlcrash\fR [options] [\fIMACHINE\-NAME\fR...]

.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fIlcrash\fR command can be used to forcedly shutdown all the virtual machines
of a Netkit lab. This roughly corresponds to suddenly unplugging them from the power
socket. \fIlcrash\fR uses the \fBvcrash\fR command to stop virtual machines
(see \fBvcrash\fR(1)).

If a list of \fIMACHINE\-NAME\fRs is provided, only virtual machines with a
matching name \fIand\fR that are part of the lab will be crashed. Otherwise, all the
machines of the lab are crashed.

The following options are supported by \fIlcrash\fR:
.TP
.B
\-d \fIDIRECTORY\fR
Crash the Netkit lab that is located inside \fIDIRECTORY\fR. If no \fB\-d\fR
option is provided, \fIlcrash\fR assumes that the lab is located in the
current directory. The path to the lab directory (being that the current
directory or one provided by \fB\-d\fR) must never contain spaces.

.TP
.B
\-F
.PD 0
.TP
.B
\-\-keep-fs
This option prevents \fIlcrash\fR from deleting virtual machines (COW)
filesystems (.disk files). By default, \fIlcrash\fR removes the filesystem after
crashing each virtual machine in order to ensure that virtual machines revert to
their original state when the lab is restarted.

Notice that the model filesystem is never removed, regardless of the use of
this option.
See the README file in the Netkit filesystem package for information about COW
and model filesystems.

.TP
.B
\-k
.PD 0
.TP
.B
\-\-kill
There are two different ways of crashing a virtual machine. The first one is
to send a special message that tells it to immediately shut down. This is also
called the mconsole method. The second one is to simply kill running processes
that correspond to the virtual machine.
.br
The mconsole method is usually faster, but may be ineffective if a virtual
machine has somewhy frozen (in which case it is unable to receive messages). If
it happens to fail, the other method (killing processes) is automatically tried.
However, killing processes is considered a last resort.
.br
If the mconsole method fails too often, this option can be used to force
\fIlcrash\fR to always kill processes. In general, there should be no need to
use it.

.TP
.B
\-l
.PD 0
.TP
.B
\-\-list
Show a list of currently running virtual machines after the lab has been
crashed. This is useful to check whether all the hosts have been shut down.

.TP
.B
\-q
.PD 0
.TP
.B
\-\-quick
.PD 0
.TP
.B
\-\-quiet
Do not check whether virtual machines have actually crashed. This results in a
faster lab shutdown, but some hanging processes may be left behind. If this
happens, try crashing the lab again without using this option or use \fBvclean\fR
(see \fBvclean\fR(1)). This option also slightly reduces output information.

.PP
The following standard options are also supported.

.TP
.B
\-h
.PD 0
.TP
.B
\-\-help
Show usage information.

.TP
.B
\-\-version
Print information about the installed Netkit release and the host kernel version
and exit. If ``\fI<unavailable>\fR'' is printed instead of a version number,
then the corresponding information could not be retrieved (for example because
a non-standard Netkit kernel or filesystem is being used).


\" ########################################

.SH "ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES"

All Netkit commands require that the \fBNETKIT_HOME\fR variable contains the
name of the directory Netkit is installed in.

Apart from this, \fIlcrash\fR supports no other environment variables.


\" ########################################

.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fIlstart\fR(1),
\fIlclean\fR(1),
\fIlhalt\fR(1),
\fIlrestart\fR(1),
\fIlinfo\fR(1),
\fIltest\fR(1),
\fIvclean\fR(1),
\fIvcrash\fR(1),
Netkit filesystem README.
    

\" ########################################

.SH AUTHOR

\fIlcrash\fR script: Stefano Pettini, Massimo Rimondini
.br
This man page: Fabio Ricci, Massimo Rimondini


\" ########################################

.so include/bugreport.man
