.TH LINFO 1 "November 2009" "" Netkit
.SH NAME
linfo \- show information about a netkit lab
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBlinfo\fR [options]


\" ########################################

.SH DESCRIPTION
This command can be used to display the following information about a Netkit lab
without launching it:

.IP \(en 2
descriptive information (retrieved from \fIlab.conf\fR)
.IP \(en 2
number of virtual machines that make up the lab
.IP \(en 2
whether the lab supports parallel startup (by means of a \fIlab.conf\fR file)

.PP
Optionally, \fIlinfo\fR can generate a graphical link-level topology map of
the lab and save it inside a PostScript file. This requires the Graphviz library
to be installed on your system.

The following options are supported by \fIlinfo\fR:
.TP
.B
\-d \fIDIRECTORY\fR
Assume the Netkit lab that is located inside \fIDIRECTORY\fR. If no \fB\-d\fR
option is provided, \fIlhalt\fR assumes that the lab is located in the
current directory. The path to the lab directory (being that the current
directory or one provided by \fB\-d\fR) must never contain spaces.

.TP
.B
\-m \fIFILE\fR
.PD 0
.TP
.B
\-\-map=\fIFILE\fR
Save a graphical link-level topology map of the lab in PostScript format inside
\fIFILE\fR. This option requires the Graphviz library to be properly installed on your
system in order to work.

.PP
The following standard options are also supported.

.TP
.B
\-h
.PD 0
.TP
.B
\-\-help
Show usage information.

.TP
.B
\-\-version
Print information about the installed Netkit release and the host kernel version
and exit. If ``\fI<unavailable>\fR'' is printed instead of a version number,
then the corresponding information could not be retrieved (for example because
a non-standard Netkit kernel or filesystem is being used).


\" ########################################

.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fIlstart\fR(1),
\fIlclean\fR(1),
\fIlcrash\fR(1),
\fIlhalt\fR(1),
\fIlrestart\fR(1),
\fIltest\fR(1).
    

\" ########################################

.SH AUTHOR

\fIlinfo\fR script: Massimo Rimondini
.br
This man page: Massimo Rimondini


\" ########################################

.so include/bugreport.man
