.TH VDUMP 1 "May 2011" "" Netkit
.SH NAME
vdump \- dump information traversing a uml_switch to standard output
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBvdump\fR \fIVIRTUAL-COLLISION-DOMAIN-ID\fR


\" ########################################

.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fIvdump\fR command starts uml_dump, which connect to a specific instance of 
uml_switch then dump in CAP format the packets received by this virtual switch
to standard output. This, sniffers like tcpdump or wireshark can be used to
print packet information.


The argument is the virtual collision domain id defined in lab.conf

\" ########################################

.SH OPTIONS

.PP
The following generic options are supported.

.TP
.B
-h
.PD 0
.TP
.B
--help
Show usage information.

.TP
.B
--version
Print information about the installed Netkit release and the host kernel version
and exit. If ``\fI<unavailable>\fR'' is printed instead of a version number,
then the corresponding information could not be retrieved (for example because
a non-standard Netkit kernel or filesystem is being used).

\" ########################################

.SH "ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES"

All Netkit commands require that the \fBNETKIT_HOME\fR variable contains the
name of the directory Netkit is installed in.

Apart from this, \fIvdump\fR supports no other environment variables.


\" ########################################

.SH EXAMPLES

The following is an example using vdump to dump packets from the virtual
collision domain id "A" and connect it to tcpdump for human readable
description of the packets.

  vdump A | tcpdump -r - -S 1500 -U

If you prefer the graphical GUI wireshark:

  vdump A | wireshark -i - -k
  

\" ########################################

.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fIvclean\fR(1),
\fIvconfig\fR(1),
\fIvcrash\fR(1),
\fIvhalt\fR(1),
\fIvstart\fR(1).


\" ########################################

.SH AUTHOR
\fIvlist\fR script: Julien Iguchi-Cartigny, Jean-Baptiste Machemie and 
Benoit Bitarelle.
.br
This man page: Julien Iguchi-Cartigny.


\" ########################################

.so include/bugreport.man
