.TH VLIST 1 "November 2009" "" Netkit
.SH NAME
vlist \- show information about running netkit virtual machines
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBvlist\fR [options] [\fIMACHINE-ID\fR...]


\" ########################################

.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fIvlist\fR command shows several information about currently running virtual
machines. If no arguments are provided, it shows a list of virtual machines
that have been started by the current user. The list entries have the following format:
\fBUSER\fR, \fBVHOST\fR, \fBPID\fR, \fBSIZE\fR, \fBINTERFACES\fR,
where:
.RS
.TP
.B
USER
is the name of the user who started the virtual machine (virtual machine owner).
.TP
.B
VHOST
is the name of the virtual machine.
.TP
.B
PID
is the PID of the virtual machine.
.TP
.B
SIZE
is the actual amount of memory consumed by the virtual machine, in KB.
.TP
.B
INTERFACES
is a (possibly empty) list of the network interfaces of the virtual machine,
together with the virtual collision domains (hubs) they are attached to.
.RE

At the bottom of the list the following summary information are shown:
.IP \(en 2
the number of running virtual machines belonging to the current user and to all
users;
.IP \(en 2
the amount of memory consumed by running virtual machines owned by the current
user and by all users.
.PP

The \fIvlist\fR command can also be used to get detailed information about specific
virtual machines. In this case the virtual machines list is not shown. You can
select virtual machines for which you want to get such information by providing
one or more \fIMACHINE\-ID\fRs on the command line. A \fIMACHINE\-ID\fR can be
either the name or the PID of a virtual machine. Detailed information consist of
the following data:

\fBAccounting information\fR

.RS
.TP
.B
PID
virtual machine PID.
.PD 0
.TP
.B
Owner
name of the user who started the virtual machine.
.PD 0
.TP
.B
Used mem
amount of memory consumed by the virtual machine.
.RE

\fBEmulation parameters\fR

.RS
.TP
.B
Kernel
name of the UML kernel used by the virtual machine.
.PD 0
.TP
.B
Memory
amount of available memory inside the virtual machine.
.PD 0
.TP
.B
Model fs
name of the model (backing) filesystem used by the virtual machine.
.PD 0
.TP
.B
Filesystem
name of the (COW) filesystem used by the virtual machine.
.PD 0
.TP
.B
Interfaces
list of network interfaces of the virtual machine, and the collision domains they
are attached to.
.PD 0
.TP
.B
Hostfs at
directory of the host filesystem that is made available inside the virtual machine
under `/hosthome'.
.PD 0
.TP
.B
Boot cmd
name of a command (or a script) that has been executed by the virtual machine
during the boot phase.
.PD 0
.TP
.B
Hostlab at
directory of the host filesystem that is made available in the virtual machine
under `/hostlab'. This directory stores information about the configuration of
a laboratory.
.PD 0
.TP
.B
Host WD at
directory of the host filesystem that is made available in the virtual machine
under `/hostwd'. This directory stores some temporary files for a laboratory.
.PD 0
.TP
.B
Console 1\fR, \fBConsole 2
devices to which the primary and secondary consoles of the virtual machine are
attached.
.PD 0
.TP
.B
Other args
additional parameters or arguments that have been appended to the virtual machine
kernel command line.
.PD 0
.TP
.B
Mconsole
name of the temporary socket file that will be used to send directives to the virtual
machine (e.g., to halt the virtual machine).
.RE

Depending on the configuration of the virtual machine, some of the above entries
may not be shown. For example, for a virtual machine without network interfaces,
the \fBInterfaces\fR entry is not shown.

\" ########################################

.SH OPTIONS

The following options can be used to influence the output of \fIvlist\fR.
.TP
.B
-n
.PD 0
.TP
.B
--no-header
Suppress both header line and summary information in the list of virtual machines.
This option has no effect if you requested detailed information about
specific virtual machines.

.TP
.B
-u \fIUSERNAME\fR
.PD 0
.TP
.B
--user=\fIUSERNAME\fR
Only show virtual machines owned by \fIUSERNAME\fR. The special user name `\fB\-\fR'
is reserved and can be used to show virtual machines owned by all users.
.br
By default, only virtual machines started by the current user (i.e., the one who
launched the \fIvlist\fR command) are shown.

This option also limits virtual machines for which detailed information can be
requested. By providing a \fIUSERNAME\fR, you can only ask information about
virtual machines owned by \fIUSERNAME\fR.

Consider that different users may start virtual machines having the same name.
Hence, special care must be taken when \fIUSERNAME\fR is `\fB\-\fR' and you are
requesting detailed information about a virtual machine by providing its name.
In this case, information about only one virtual machine are reported, even if
several virtual machines with the same name exist. In particular, \fIvlist\fR
considers the first machine with a matching name in the list returned by `vlist --user=-'.

.PP
The following generic options are also supported.

.TP
.B
-h
.PD 0
.TP
.B
--help
Show usage information.

.TP
.B
--version
Print information about the installed Netkit release and the host kernel version
and exit. If ``\fI<unavailable>\fR'' is printed instead of a version number,
then the corresponding information could not be retrieved (for example because
a non-standard Netkit kernel or filesystem is being used).


\" ########################################

.SH "ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES"

All Netkit commands require that the \fBNETKIT_HOME\fR variable contains the
name of the directory Netkit is installed in.

Apart from this, \fIvlist\fR supports no other environment variables.


\" ########################################

.SH EXAMPLES

The following is an example of the output of \fIvlist\fR when launched with no
arguments.

.RS 3
.nf
USER             VHOST               PID       SIZE  INTERFACES
foo              pc1                 300      12684
foo              pc2                1126      69720  eth0 @ A, eth1 @ B

Total virtual machines:       2    (you),        2    (all users).
Total consumed memory:    82404 KB (you),    82404 KB (all users).
.fi
.RE


The following example shows detailed information about a specific virtual machine,
which you can get by typing `vlist pc1'.

.RS 3
.nf
============= Information for virtual machine "pc1" =============
 --- Accounting information ---
   PID:        300
   Owner:      foo
   Used mem:   12684 KB
 --- Emulation parameters ---
   Kernel:     /home/foo/netkit/kernel/netkit-kernel
   Modules:    /home/foo/netkit/kernel/modules
   Memory:     8 MB
   Model fs:   /home/foo/netkit/fs/netkit-fs
   Filesystem: /home/foo/pc1.disk
   Hostfs at:  /home/foo
   Console 1:  terminal emulator
   Console 2:  disabled
   Other args: umid=pc1 root=98:1 uml_dir=/home/foo/.netkit/mconsole quiet
   Mconsole:   /home/foo/.netkit/mconsole/pc1/mconsole
.fi
.RE


\" ########################################

.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fIvclean\fR(1),
\fIvconf\fR(1),
\fIvcrash\fR(1),
\fIvhalt\fR(1),
\fIvstart\fR(1).


\" ########################################

.SH AUTHOR
\fIvlist\fR script: Massimo Rimondini
.br
This man page: Massimo Rimondini, Fabio Ricci


\" ########################################

.so include/bugreport.man
